h2. 0.12.0 (04-Jan-2010)

An anniversary release of fixes and hacks, introduced by venerable users of the plugin.

* Allow for inheritance of subject (Jeff Jaco)
* Renamed "Object" module in extensions, since it caused some breakage inside activesupport
  (invisiblelama).
* @show_to@ helper for usage in views (Antono Vasiljev)
* @:association_name@ config option, now you can change Subject#role_objects to whatever
  you want (Jeff Tucker).
* Fix bug when Subject#id is a string, e.g. UUID (Julien Bachmann)
* Bug with action blocks when using anonymous and another role (Franck)


h2. 0.11.0 (16-Sep-2009)

* :protect_global_roles
* Subject#roles renamed to Subject#role_objects
* Fix namespaced models in roles backend (thanks goes to Tomas Jogin)
* Action name override in boolean methods.
* @:query_method@ option for @access_control@.

h2. 0.10.0 (03-May-2009)

* Use context+matchy combo for testing
* Bugfix: unwanted double quote in generated SQL statement

h2. 0.9.4 (27-Feb-2009)

* Introduce :if and :unless rule options.

h2. 0.9.3 (04-Feb-2009)

* Fix bug in delete_role - didn't work with custom class names
* Add @:helper@ option for @access_control@.
* Ability to generate helper methods directly (place @include Acl9Helpers@ in your helper module).

h2. 0.9.2 (11-Jan-2009)

* @access_control :method do end@ as shorter form for @access_control :as_method => :method do end@.
* Boolean method can now receive an objects hash which will be looked into first before taking
  an instance variable.

h2. 0.9.1 (03-Jan-2009)

Initial release.
