# Contributing

Hi, I'm Jason, my online nickname is "smathy" which I use on IRC, twitter,
StackOverflow, here on github, and a few other places on the internet.

Oleg is the creator of acl9, but other commitments have meant that he's had
very little time to maintain this project and so I've basically taken over as
the primary maintainer.

I like to start by introducing myself so that you know that I'm just a human
being, a normal guy, and that if you have something you want to contribute to
acl9 then I'm more than happy to hear from you.

There really aren't any hard and fast rules here for contributing. Feel free to
raise issues, you can even just ask questions in an issue if you'd like,
although IRC or StackOverflow is probably a much better forum for that. You can
ping me on twitter, or even email me at jk@handle.it

Also see the README for information on getting in contact with the rest of the
community.

## Dev Stuff

If you're going to contribute code then just fork our repo, write your thing,
and submit a pull request.

### Setup

You should be able to just fork the repo and run `bundle && rake` to see the
tests running.

We use [Appraisal](thoughtbot/appraisal) to test against multiple versions of
Rails, so you can read up on that and use it to test against all the Rails
versions we support or against a specific one.

### How to

If you're fixing a bug then please arrange your pull request in two commits, the
first one will be a test that demonstrates the bug, that test will be failing
when you create it. The second commit will be the code change that fixes the
bug.

Don't let this be a blocker for you, I'm not saying you have to do TDD. I don't
care whether you actually write the test first, or the code first, I just care
about the order of the commits. Those with experience in reviewing PRs will know
why. I can grab your PR, roll it back to `HEAD^` and run the test, seeing it
fail and confirming that your test works, then roll it back to the head of your
branch and see your code fixing the test. It makes it very easy to review a PR.

You _can_ submit a bugfix without a test, although those take **MUCH** longer to
review because it's often hard to work out what problem you're solving.

Also, it's up to you whether you want to create an issue in github first. I'd
recommend that you do because it gives a good place to discuss the details of
the issue.

Also, feel free to submit ideas as PRs, just make sure you put it clearly in the
text that this is not ready for merge yet.
